README.md, before:

# Data Modelling SDK

Shared SDK for model operations across platforms (API, WASM, Native).

Copyright (c) 2025 Mark Olliver - Licensed under MIT

## Features

- **Storage Backends**: File system, browser storage (IndexedDB/localStorage), and HTTP API
- **Model Loading/Saving**: Load and save models from various storage backends
- **Import/Export**: Import from SQL (PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, Generic, Databricks), ODCS, ODCL, JSON Schema, AVRO, Protobuf, CADS, ODPS, BPMN, DMN, OpenAPI; Export to various formats
- **Business Domain Schema**: Organize systems, CADS nodes, and ODCS nodes within business domains
- **Universal Converter**: Convert any format to ODCS v3.1.0 format
- **OpenAPI to ODCS Converter**: Convert OpenAPI schema components to ODCS table definitions
- **Validation**: Table and relationship validation (naming conflicts, circular dependencies)
- **Schema Reference**: JSON Schema definitions for all supported formats in `schemas/` directory

## File Structure

The SDK organizes files using a domain-based directory structure:

```
base_directory/
├── .git/                     # Git folder (if present)
├── README.md                 # Repository files
├── domain1/                  # Domain directory
│   ├── domain.yaml          # Domain definition
│   ├── table1.odcs.yaml      # ODCS table files
│   ├── table2.odcs.yaml
│   ├── product1.odps.yaml   # ODPS product files
│   ├── model1.cads.yaml     # CADS asset files
│   ├── api1.openapi.yaml    # OpenAPI specification files
│   ├── process1.bpmn.xml    # BPMN process model files
│   └── decision1.dmn.xml     # DMN decision model files
├── domain2/                  # Another domain directory
│   ├── domain.yaml
│   └── ...
└── tables/                    # Legacy: tables not in any domain (backward compatibility)
```

Each domain directory contains:
- `domain.yaml`: The domain definition with systems, CADS nodes, ODCS nodes, and connections
- `*.odcs.yaml`: ODCS table files referenced by ODCSNodes in the domain
- `*.odps.yaml`: ODPS product files for data products in the domain
- `*.cads.yaml`: CADS asset files referenced by CADSNodes in the domain
- `*.openapi.yaml` / `*.openapi.json`: OpenAPI specification files (can be referenced by CADS assets)
- `*.bpmn.xml`: BPMN 2.0 process model files (can be referenced by CADS assets)
- `*.dmn.xml`: DMN 1.3 decision model files (can be referenced by CADS assets)

## Usage

### File System Backend (Native Apps)

```rust
use data_modelling_sdk::storage::filesystem::FileSystemStorageBackend;
use data_modelling_sdk::model::ModelLoader;

let storage = FileSystemStorageBackend::new("/path/to/workspace");
let loader = ModelLoader::new(storage);
let result = loader.load_model("workspace_path").await?;
```

### Browser Storage Backend (WASM Apps)

```rust
use data_modelling_sdk::storage::browser::BrowserStorageBackend;
use data_modelling_sdk::model::ModelLoader;

let storage = BrowserStorageBackend::new("db_name", "store_name");
let loader = ModelLoader::new(storage);
let result = loader.load_model("workspace_path").await?;
```

### API Backend (Online Mode)

```rust
use data_modelling_sdk::storage::api::ApiStorageBackend;
use data_modelling_sdk::model::ModelLoader;

let storage = ApiStorageBackend::new("http://localhost:8081/api/v1", Some("session_id"));
let loader = ModelLoader::new(storage);
let result = loader.load_model("workspace_path").await?;
```

### WASM Bindings (Browser/Offline Mode)

The SDK exposes WASM bindings for parsing and export operations, enabling offline functionality in web applications.

**Build the WASM module**:
```bash
wasm-pack build --target web --out-dir pkg --features wasm
```

**Use in JavaScript/TypeScript**:
```javascript
import init, { parseOdcsYaml, exportToOdcsYaml } from './pkg/data_modelling_sdk.js';

// Initialize the module
await init();

// Parse ODCS YAML
const yaml = `apiVersion: v3.1.0
kind: DataContract
name: users
schema:
  fields:
    - name: id
      type: bigint`;

const resultJson = parseOdcsYaml(yaml);
const result = JSON.parse(resultJson);
console.log('Parsed tables:', result.tables);

// Export to ODCS YAML
const workspace = {
  tables: [{
    id: "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
    name: "users",
    columns: [{ name: "id", data_type: "bigint", nullable: false, primary_key: true }]
  }],
  relationships: []
};

const exportedYaml = exportToOdcsYaml(JSON.stringify(workspace));
console.log('Exported YAML:', exportedYaml);
```

**Available WASM Functions**:

**Import/Export**:
- `parseOdcsYaml(yamlContent: string): string` - Parse ODCS YAML to workspace structure
- `exportToOdcsYaml(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export workspace to ODCS YAML
- `importFromSql(sqlContent: string, dialect: string): string` - Import from SQL (supported dialects: "postgres"/"postgresql", "mysql", "sqlite", "generic", "databricks")
- `importFromAvro(avroContent: string): string` - Import from AVRO schema
- `importFromJsonSchema(jsonSchemaContent: string): string` - Import from JSON Schema
- `importFromProtobuf(protobufContent: string): string` - Import from Protobuf
- `importFromCads(yamlContent: string): string` - Import CADS (Compute Asset Description Specification) YAML
- `importFromOdps(yamlContent: string): string` - Import ODPS (Open Data Product Standard) YAML
- `importBpmnModel(domainId: string, xmlContent: string, modelName?: string): string` - Import BPMN 2.0 XML model
- `importDmnModel(domainId: string, xmlContent: string, modelName?: string): string` - Import DMN 1.3 XML model
- `importOpenapiSpec(domainId: string, content: string, apiName?: string): string` - Import OpenAPI 3.1.1 specification
- `exportToSql(workspaceJson: string, dialect: string): string` - Export to SQL (supported dialects: "postgres"/"postgresql", "mysql", "sqlite", "generic", "databricks")
- `exportToAvro(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to AVRO schema
- `exportToJsonSchema(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to JSON Schema
- `exportToProtobuf(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to Protobuf
- `exportToCads(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to CADS YAML
- `exportToOdps(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to ODPS YAML
- `exportBpmnModel(xmlContent: string): string` - Export BPMN model to XML
- `exportDmnModel(xmlContent: string): string` - Export DMN model to XML
- `exportOpenapiSpec(content: string, sourceFormat: string, targetFormat?: string): string` - Export OpenAPI spec with optional format conversion
- `convertToOdcs(input: string, format?: string): string` - Universal converter: convert any format to ODCS v3.1.0
- `convertOpenapiToOdcs(openapiContent: string, componentName: string, tableName?: string): string` - Convert OpenAPI schema component to ODCS table
- `analyzeOpenapiConversion(openapiContent: string, componentName: string): string` - Analyze OpenAPI component conversion feasibility
- `migrateDataflowToDomain(dataflowYaml: string, domainName?: string): string` - Migrate DataFlow YAML to Domain schema format

**Domain Operations**:
- `createDomain(name: string): string` - Create a new business domain
- `addSystemToDomain(workspaceJson: string, domainId: string, systemJson: string): string` - Add a system to a domain
- `addCadsNodeToDomain(workspaceJson: string, domainId: string, nodeJson: string): string` - Add a CADS node to a domain
- `addOdcsNodeToDomain(workspaceJson: string, domainId: string, nodeJson: string): string` - Add an ODCS node to a domain

**Filtering**:
- `filterNodesByOwner(workspaceJson: string, owner: string): string` - Filter tables by owner
- `filterRelationshipsByOwner(workspaceJson: string, owner: string): string` - Filter relationships by owner
- `filterNodesByInfrastructureType(workspaceJson: string, infrastructureType: string): string` - Filter tables by infrastructure type
- `filterRelationshipsByInfrastructureType(workspaceJson: string, infrastructureType: string): string` - Filter relationships by infrastructure type
- `filterByTags(workspaceJson: string, tag: string): string` - Filter nodes and relationships by tag (supports Simple, Pair, and List tag formats)

## Development

### Pre-commit Hooks

This project uses pre-commit hooks to ensure code quality. Install them with:

```bash
# Install pre-commit (if not already installed)
pip install pre-commit

# Install the git hooks
pre-commit install

# Run hooks manually on all files
pre-commit run --all-files
```

The hooks will automatically run on `git commit` and check:
- Rust formatting (`cargo fmt`)
- Rust linting (`cargo clippy`)
- Security audit (`cargo audit`)
- File formatting (trailing whitespace, end of file, etc.)
- YAML/TOML/JSON syntax

### CI/CD

GitHub Actions workflows automatically run on push and pull requests:
- **Lint**: Format check, clippy, and security audit
- **Test**: Unit and integration tests on Linux, macOS, and Windows
- **Build**: Release build verification
- **Publish**: Automatic publishing to crates.io on main branch (after all checks pass)

## Documentation

- **[Architecture Guide](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)**: Comprehensive guide to project architecture, design decisions, and use cases
- **[Schema Overview Guide](docs/SCHEMA_OVERVIEW.md)**: Detailed documentation of all supported schemas

The SDK supports:
- **ODCS v3.1.0**: Primary format for data contracts (tables)
- **ODCL v1.2.1**: Legacy data contract format (backward compatibility)
- **ODPS**: Data products linking to ODCS Tables
- **CADS v1.0**: Compute assets (AI/ML models, applications, pipelines)
- **BPMN 2.0**: Business Process Model and Notation (process models stored in native XML)
- **DMN 1.3**: Decision Model and Notation (decision models stored in native XML)
- **OpenAPI 3.1.1**: API specifications (stored in native YAML or JSON)
- **Business Domain Schema**: Organize systems, CADS nodes, and ODCS nodes
- **Universal Converter**: Convert any format to ODCS v3.1.0
- **OpenAPI to ODCS Converter**: Convert OpenAPI schema components to ODCS table definitions

### Schema Reference Directory

The SDK maintains JSON Schema definitions for all supported formats in the `schemas/` directory:

- **ODCS v3.1.0**: `schemas/odcs-json-schema-v3.1.0.json` - Primary format for data contracts
- **ODCL v1.2.1**: `schemas/odcl-json-schema-1.2.1.json` - Legacy data contract format
- **ODPS**: `schemas/odps-json-schema-latest.json` - Data products linking to ODCS tables
- **CADS v1.0**: `schemas/cads.schema.json` - Compute assets (AI/ML models, applications, pipelines)

These schemas serve as authoritative references for validation, documentation, and compliance. See [schemas/README.md](schemas/README.md) for detailed information about each schema.

## Status

The SDK provides comprehensive support for multiple data modeling formats:

- ✅ Storage backend abstraction and implementations
- ✅ Model loader/saver structure
- ✅ Full import/export implementation for all supported formats
- ✅ Validation module structure
- ✅ Business Domain schema support
- ✅ Universal format converter
- ✅ Enhanced tag support (Simple, Pair, List)
- ✅ Full ODCS/ODCL field preservation
- ✅ Schema reference directory (`schemas/`) with JSON Schema definitions for all supported formats

Commit message:

Release 1.7.0: CLI wrapper and proto2/proto3 support (#18)
* chore: bump version to 1.7.0

- Add CLI wrapper implementation (data-modelling-cli)
- Add proto2/proto3 format support for Protobuf export
- Enable OpenAPI support by default in CLI builds
- Update documentation with CLI usage and build instructions
- Fix proto3 export syntax (remove invalid 'optional repeated')

* fix: resolve CI compilation errors

- Remove unused uuid::Uuid import
- Update jsonschema API: JSONSchema::compile -> Validator::new
- Fix clippy warnings: &PathBuf -> &Path
- Remove to_string() from format! args
- Mark export_model_from_tables as allow(dead_code)
- Remove unused CliError import from main.rs
- Remove unused imports and fix duplicate attributes in test files

README.md, after:

# Data Modelling SDK

Shared SDK for model operations across platforms (API, WASM, Native).

Copyright (c) 2025 Mark Olliver - Licensed under MIT

## CLI Tool

The SDK includes a command-line interface (CLI) for importing and exporting schemas. See [CLI.md](CLI.md) for detailed usage instructions.

**Quick Start:**
```bash
# Build the CLI (with OpenAPI support)
cargo build --release --bin data-modelling-cli --features cli,openapi

# Run it
./target/release/data-modelling-cli --help
```

**Note:** The CLI now includes OpenAPI support by default in GitHub releases. For local builds, include the `openapi` feature to enable OpenAPI import/export.

## Features

- **Storage Backends**: File system, browser storage (IndexedDB/localStorage), and HTTP API
- **Model Loading/Saving**: Load and save models from various storage backends
- **Import/Export**: Import from SQL (PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, Generic, Databricks), ODCS, ODCL, JSON Schema, AVRO, Protobuf (proto2/proto3), CADS, ODPS, BPMN, DMN, OpenAPI; Export to various formats
- **Business Domain Schema**: Organize systems, CADS nodes, and ODCS nodes within business domains
- **Universal Converter**: Convert any format to ODCS v3.1.0 format
- **OpenAPI to ODCS Converter**: Convert OpenAPI schema components to ODCS table definitions
- **Validation**: Table and relationship validation (naming conflicts, circular dependencies)
- **Schema Reference**: JSON Schema definitions for all supported formats in `schemas/` directory

## File Structure

The SDK organizes files using a domain-based directory structure:

```
base_directory/
├── .git/                     # Git folder (if present)
├── README.md                 # Repository files
├── domain1/                  # Domain directory
│   ├── domain.yaml          # Domain definition
│   ├── table1.odcs.yaml      # ODCS table files
│   ├── table2.odcs.yaml
│   ├── product1.odps.yaml   # ODPS product files
│   ├── model1.cads.yaml     # CADS asset files
│   ├── api1.openapi.yaml    # OpenAPI specification files
│   ├── process1.bpmn.xml    # BPMN process model files
│   └── decision1.dmn.xml     # DMN decision model files
├── domain2/                  # Another domain directory
│   ├── domain.yaml
│   └── ...
└── tables/                    # Legacy: tables not in any domain (backward compatibility)
```

Each domain directory contains:
- `domain.yaml`: The domain definition with systems, CADS nodes, ODCS nodes, and connections
- `*.odcs.yaml`: ODCS table files referenced by ODCSNodes in the domain
- `*.odps.yaml`: ODPS product files for data products in the domain
- `*.cads.yaml`: CADS asset files referenced by CADSNodes in the domain
- `*.openapi.yaml` / `*.openapi.json`: OpenAPI specification files (can be referenced by CADS assets)
- `*.bpmn.xml`: BPMN 2.0 process model files (can be referenced by CADS assets)
- `*.dmn.xml`: DMN 1.3 decision model files (can be referenced by CADS assets)

## Usage

### File System Backend (Native Apps)

```rust
use data_modelling_sdk::storage::filesystem::FileSystemStorageBackend;
use data_modelling_sdk::model::ModelLoader;

let storage = FileSystemStorageBackend::new("/path/to/workspace");
let loader = ModelLoader::new(storage);
let result = loader.load_model("workspace_path").await?;
```

### Browser Storage Backend (WASM Apps)

```rust
use data_modelling_sdk::storage::browser::BrowserStorageBackend;
use data_modelling_sdk::model::ModelLoader;

let storage = BrowserStorageBackend::new("db_name", "store_name");
let loader = ModelLoader::new(storage);
let result = loader.load_model("workspace_path").await?;
```

### API Backend (Online Mode)

```rust
use data_modelling_sdk::storage::api::ApiStorageBackend;
use data_modelling_sdk::model::ModelLoader;

let storage = ApiStorageBackend::new("http://localhost:8081/api/v1", Some("session_id"));
let loader = ModelLoader::new(storage);
let result = loader.load_model("workspace_path").await?;
```

### WASM Bindings (Browser/Offline Mode)

The SDK exposes WASM bindings for parsing and export operations, enabling offline functionality in web applications.

**Build the WASM module**:
```bash
wasm-pack build --target web --out-dir pkg --features wasm
```

**Use in JavaScript/TypeScript**:
```javascript
import init, { parseOdcsYaml, exportToOdcsYaml } from './pkg/data_modelling_sdk.js';

// Initialize the module
await init();

// Parse ODCS YAML
const yaml = `apiVersion: v3.1.0
kind: DataContract
name: users
schema:
  fields:
    - name: id
      type: bigint`;

const resultJson = parseOdcsYaml(yaml);
const result = JSON.parse(resultJson);
console.log('Parsed tables:', result.tables);

// Export to ODCS YAML
const workspace = {
  tables: [{
    id: "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
    name: "users",
    columns: [{ name: "id", data_type: "bigint", nullable: false, primary_key: true }]
  }],
  relationships: []
};

const exportedYaml = exportToOdcsYaml(JSON.stringify(workspace));
console.log('Exported YAML:', exportedYaml);
```

**Available WASM Functions**:

**Import/Export**:
- `parseOdcsYaml(yamlContent: string): string` - Parse ODCS YAML to workspace structure
- `exportToOdcsYaml(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export workspace to ODCS YAML
- `importFromSql(sqlContent: string, dialect: string): string` - Import from SQL (supported dialects: "postgres"/"postgresql", "mysql", "sqlite", "generic", "databricks")
- `importFromAvro(avroContent: string): string` - Import from AVRO schema
- `importFromJsonSchema(jsonSchemaContent: string): string` - Import from JSON Schema
- `importFromProtobuf(protobufContent: string): string` - Import from Protobuf
- `importFromCads(yamlContent: string): string` - Import CADS (Compute Asset Description Specification) YAML
- `importFromOdps(yamlContent: string): string` - Import ODPS (Open Data Product Standard) YAML
- `importBpmnModel(domainId: string, xmlContent: string, modelName?: string): string` - Import BPMN 2.0 XML model
- `importDmnModel(domainId: string, xmlContent: string, modelName?: string): string` - Import DMN 1.3 XML model
- `importOpenapiSpec(domainId: string, content: string, apiName?: string): string` - Import OpenAPI 3.1.1 specification
- `exportToSql(workspaceJson: string, dialect: string): string` - Export to SQL (supported dialects: "postgres"/"postgresql", "mysql", "sqlite", "generic", "databricks")
- `exportToAvro(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to AVRO schema
- `exportToJsonSchema(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to JSON Schema
- `exportToProtobuf(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to Protobuf
- `exportToCads(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to CADS YAML
- `exportToOdps(workspaceJson: string): string` - Export to ODPS YAML
- `exportBpmnModel(xmlContent: string): string` - Export BPMN model to XML
- `exportDmnModel(xmlContent: string): string` - Export DMN model to XML
- `exportOpenapiSpec(content: string, sourceFormat: string, targetFormat?: string): string` - Export OpenAPI spec with optional format conversion
- `convertToOdcs(input: string, format?: string): string` - Universal converter: convert any format to ODCS v3.1.0
- `convertOpenapiToOdcs(openapiContent: string, componentName: string, tableName?: string): string` - Convert OpenAPI schema component to ODCS table
- `analyzeOpenapiConversion(openapiContent: string, componentName: string): string` - Analyze OpenAPI component conversion feasibility
- `migrateDataflowToDomain(dataflowYaml: string, domainName?: string): string` - Migrate DataFlow YAML to Domain schema format

**Domain Operations**:
- `createDomain(name: string): string` - Create a new business domain
- `addSystemToDomain(workspaceJson: string, domainId: string, systemJson: string): string` - Add a system to a domain
- `addCadsNodeToDomain(workspaceJson: string, domainId: string, nodeJson: string): string` - Add a CADS node to a domain
- `addOdcsNodeToDomain(workspaceJson: string, domainId: string, nodeJson: string): string` - Add an ODCS node to a domain

**Filtering**:
- `filterNodesByOwner(workspaceJson: string, owner: string): string` - Filter tables by owner
- `filterRelationshipsByOwner(workspaceJson: string, owner: string): string` - Filter relationships by owner
- `filterNodesByInfrastructureType(workspaceJson: string, infrastructureType: string): string` - Filter tables by infrastructure type
- `filterRelationshipsByInfrastructureType(workspaceJson: string, infrastructureType: string): string` - Filter relationships by infrastructure type
- `filterByTags(workspaceJson: string, tag: string): string` - Filter nodes and relationships by tag (supports Simple, Pair, and List tag formats)

## Development

### Pre-commit Hooks

This project uses pre-commit hooks to ensure code quality. Install them with:

```bash
# Install pre-commit (if not already installed)
pip install pre-commit

# Install the git hooks
pre-commit install

# Run hooks manually on all files
pre-commit run --all-files
```

The hooks will automatically run on `git commit` and check:
- Rust formatting (`cargo fmt`)
- Rust linting (`cargo clippy`)
- Security audit (`cargo audit`)
- File formatting (trailing whitespace, end of file, etc.)
- YAML/TOML/JSON syntax

### CI/CD

GitHub Actions workflows automatically run on push and pull requests:
- **Lint**: Format check, clippy, and security audit
- **Test**: Unit and integration tests on Linux, macOS, and Windows
- **Build**: Release build verification
- **Publish**: Automatic publishing to crates.io on main branch (after all checks pass)

## Documentation

- **[Architecture Guide](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)**: Comprehensive guide to project architecture, design decisions, and use cases
- **[Schema Overview Guide](docs/SCHEMA_OVERVIEW.md)**: Detailed documentation of all supported schemas

The SDK supports:
- **ODCS v3.1.0**: Primary format for data contracts (tables)
- **ODCL v1.2.1**: Legacy data contract format (backward compatibility)
- **ODPS**: Data products linking to ODCS Tables
- **CADS v1.0**: Compute assets (AI/ML models, applications, pipelines)
- **BPMN 2.0**: Business Process Model and Notation (process models stored in native XML)
- **DMN 1.3**: Decision Model and Notation (decision models stored in native XML)
- **OpenAPI 3.1.1**: API specifications (stored in native YAML or JSON)
- **Business Domain Schema**: Organize systems, CADS nodes, and ODCS nodes
- **Universal Converter**: Convert any format to ODCS v3.1.0
- **OpenAPI to ODCS Converter**: Convert OpenAPI schema components to ODCS table definitions

### Schema Reference Directory

The SDK maintains JSON Schema definitions for all supported formats in the `schemas/` directory:

- **ODCS v3.1.0**: `schemas/odcs-json-schema-v3.1.0.json` - Primary format for data contracts
- **ODCL v1.2.1**: `schemas/odcl-json-schema-1.2.1.json` - Legacy data contract format
- **ODPS**: `schemas/odps-json-schema-latest.json` - Data products linking to ODCS tables
- **CADS v1.0**: `schemas/cads.schema.json` - Compute assets (AI/ML models, applications, pipelines)

These schemas serve as authoritative references for validation, documentation, and compliance. See [schemas/README.md](schemas/README.md) for detailed information about each schema.

## Status

The SDK provides comprehensive support for multiple data modeling formats:

- ✅ Storage backend abstraction and implementations
- ✅ Model loader/saver structure
- ✅ Full import/export implementation for all supported formats
- ✅ Validation module structure
- ✅ Business Domain schema support
- ✅ Universal format converter
- ✅ Enhanced tag support (Simple, Pair, List)
- ✅ Full ODCS/ODCL field preservation
- ✅ Schema reference directory (`schemas/`) with JSON Schema definitions for all supported formats
